This [IMDB review](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0071615/reviews) of Alejandro
Jodorowsky's THE HOLY MOUNTAIN says _"If you liked 'The Wall' (you know, the
Pink Floyd movie), but thought it was a bit of a downer and suffered from the
lack of a fat woman humping an excitable, legless, animatronic horse, this
movie could be for you"_ which may be a little flip but not entirely wrong
description of what to expect from this film.

<!--BREAK-->

I'm embarrassed to admit that I hadn't heard of Alejandro Jodorowsky until I
watched [Jodorowsky's Dune](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1935156/), a
(fantastic) documentary about his failed attempt to make an insanely ambitious
adaptation of the Frank Herbert novel.  His approach was to recruit a set of
"spiritual warriors" completely dedicated to the creation of the movie.  Even
though they didn't wind up getting their Dune made his warriors went on to
influence Alien, Blade Runner, Flash Gordon and pretty much every sci-fi movie
since.

The plot of The Holy Mountain was familiar in that regard. It is chiefly
concerned with an Alchemist (played by Jodorowsky) and his attempt to achieve
immortality by assembling a group of the most powerful mortals in the world and
overthrowing a set of immortal beings who live atop the titular mountain.  Each
of these seven people gets their own segment of the film, so we understand why
they have been selected.

Lest you think that these are somehow virtuous individuals, every introduction
illustrates a new form of wrath, greed, vanity or other sin.  They are arms
dealers, militarized police captains, corrupt political advisors, millionaires.
People are raped and killed.  Factories churn out weapons, art, and religious
icons in massive quantities. This is a sick world, and the depiction of
everything the most powerful individuals have done helps flesh out the
depravity on half a dozen different levels.

The cynicism could easily become overbearing, but it's a testament to
Jodorowsky's creativity that this doesn't really happen. He presents shocking
imagery with an intense visual style and an underlying black humor - everything
feels delivered with a little smirk.

Consider the backstory for Axon of Neptune, the secret police chief.  He builds
a police force of castrated boys ("Your sacrifice completes my sanctuary of one
thousand testicles" he claims to his latest recruit) and puts them to use
slaughtering a crowd of protesters. (We're not sure what the protest concerns
but it really could be anything given what we've seen so far).

Right off the bat, a set of explosions disrupt the protest.  But the smoke
clouds are a rich azure, so the scene looks more like a Holi celebration than a
slaughter.

<div class="roomanna-centered">
  <figure class="roomanna-figure">
    <video
      preload="none"
      width="640"
      height="264"
      controls
      poster="{{(.Image "smoke").Data.Permalink}}"
      src="{{link "holymountain-smoke-480-nosound.mp4" }}">
    </video>
  </figure>
</div>

The bits where protesters are killed are all played for effect - the tone, the
action, and the acting all indicate an atrocity.  But the visuals themselves
are subversive - Jodorowsky uses proxies for gratuitous gore.  We're aware of
what is going on without needing to suffer through it directly.

In this scene, the police are obviously throwing and spraying red paint onto
the crowd.

<div class="roomanna-centered">
  <figure class="roomanna-figure">
    <video
      preload="none"
      width="640"
      height="264"
      controls
      poster="{{(.Image "paint01").Data.Permalink}}"
      src="{{link "holymountain-paint01-480-nosound.mp4" }}">
    </video>
  </figure>
</div>

A set of eviscerations play out in odd fashion.  Sausages and ribbon stand in
for intestines.

<div class="roomanna-centered">
  <figure class="roomanna-figure">
    <video
      preload="none"
      width="640"
      height="264"
      controls
      poster="{{(.Image "sausages").Data.Permalink}}"
      src="{{link "holymountain-sausages-480-nosound.mp4" }}">
    </video>
  </figure>
</div>

<div class="roomanna-centered">
  <figure class="roomanna-figure">
    <video
      preload="none"
      width="640"
      height="264"
      controls
      poster="{{(.Image "ribbon").Data.Permalink}}"
      src="{{link "holymountain-ribbon-480-nosound.mp4" }}">
    </video>
  </figure>
</div>

Police pull lightbulbs, dirt, watermelon, a houseplant, even a live dove from
the innards of their victims.

<div class="roomanna-centered">
  <figure class="roomanna-figure">
    <video
      preload="none"
      width="640"
      height="264"
      controls
      poster="{{(.Image "insides").Data.Permalink}}"
      src="{{link "holymountain-insides-480-nosound.mp4" }}">
    </video>
  </figure>
</div>

An officer removes a cauliflower from between the legs of a strawberry-covered
woman and stomps on it.

<div class="roomanna-centered">
  <figure class="roomanna-figure">
    <video
      preload="none"
      width="640"
      height="264"
      controls
      poster="{{(.Image "strawberries").Data.Permalink}}"
      src="{{link "holymountain-strawberries-480-nosound.mp4" }}">
    </video>
  </figure>
</div>

The most elaborate special effects come at the end, where a set of copper pipes
molded to actresses' heads spurt different colored paints onto the ground.
Perhaps the only literal brutality comes from Axon himself, as he pulls the
head off of an obviously a crude animatronic as a skull slides up from between
its shoulders.

<div class="roomanna-centered">
  <figure class="roomanna-figure">
    <video
      preload="none"
      width="640"
      height="264"
      controls
      poster="{{(.Image "paint02").Data.Permalink}}"
      src="{{link "holymountain-paint02-480-nosound.mp4" }}">
    </video>
  </figure>
</div>

For the cost of some groceries, basic hardware supplies and a bunch of extras,
Jodorowsky stages what would be an iconic scene if the rest of the movie
weren't filled with such flourishes.  Broadly, The Holy Mountain is a stunning
[Mind Screw](http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/MindScrew) and gorgeous
to watch.  I think it's one of the best cinematic treatments for the "assemble
a party and go on a quest" archetype.  Just don't expect much catharsis from
the ending, which stops the movie like a brick wall.
