[link-text]: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/42455/42455-0.txt
[link-similarity]: https://stats.stackexchange.com/a/151362

One of my favorite undergraduate courses was an optional elective on the topic
of ciphers, starting with handwritten approaches and eventually moving on into
mechanical and then digital cryptography.  A few classes in the handwritten
section started with the professor writing ciphertext on the board and inviting
us to spend some time attempting to break it without knowledge of what the
cipher actually was.

A while back I pledged to write a paper on a topic unrelated to my academic
major for my Estonian fraternity.  I never actually got around to doing this,
but at the time of the pledge I had the ciphers course fresh in my head and
thought it would more research would be interesting.  So in the interest of
actually making some progress on this, I thought writing a bit about
handwritten ciphers here may be a good way to motivate myself.  To ease into
it, I'm starting with the most basic cipher I know of: the Caesar Cipher.

<!--BREAK-->

The Caesar cipher itself is a substitution cipher: to convert a piece of
plaintext into ciphertext, every letter in the plaintext is consistently
replaced with another letter according to some mapping.  In the Caesar cipher,
the mapping is simply defined by shifting letters forward a set number of
steps, wrapping from the end to the start as needed.  I'll refer to the number
of steps at the `ROT` value: a mapping of `ROT1` means that all 'A's are
replaced with 'B's, 'B's with 'C's, and 'Z's with 'A's.  `ROT20` shifts the
letters by 20 spaces, and so on.

I've written up a small utility to generate the mapping.  Dragging the slider
below shows the mapping from plaintext letters on the top, to ciphertext
letters on the bottom:

<div id="demo-alphabet"></div>

Substitution ciphers must define the alphabet they operate on.  I've decided to
use the 26 letters in the English alphabet and not to convert any other
characters including whitespace and punctuation, but it's possible to define
the working alphabet to accommodate any characters.   I'll use `ALPHA` to
represent the size of the working alphabet, with `ALPHA26` representing the 26
English characters I'm using.

To convert plaintext to ciphertext, substitute every letter in the plaintext
with the mapped value for that letter.  To convert ciphertext back into
plaintext, undo the mapping by applying a ciphertext of `ROT` - `ALPHA`.  This
means that text encrypted with  `ALPHA26` and `ROT3` can be decrypted by
applying `ROT23` (26 - 3) to the encrypted text.

Below, I've taken some [sample text][link-text] from the top box and applied
the configured `ROT` mapping to it to produce the Caesar Cipher-encrypted
ciphertext in the bottom box.  The text in the top is editable in case you want
to experiment with other input.

<div id="demo-text"></div>

While any value can be used for `ROT`, there are a couple values with special
properties.  A `ROT` of 0 or of `ALPHA` is an identity mapping - the plaintext
and ciphertext will be identical.  For alphabets where the length of the
alphabet is even, a `ROT` of `ALPHA / 2` will act as both an encryption and
decryption mapping - in the case of `ALPHA26`, applying `ROT13` to plaintext
will produce ciphertext, while applying `ROT13` to ciphertext produces
plaintext.  This property makes for nice usability, to the point where such
encoding is used on some websites as obfuscation for spoilers. There's even a
`rot13` command line utility which ships on linux distributions.  In the demo
above, try setting the slider to 13 and pasting the ciphertext into the box on
the top - you'll see the original passage in the lower box.

The cipher itself is named after Julius Caesar, who reportedly used a form of
`ROT3` in his sensitive letters:

<blockquote class="blockquote">
  <p class="mb-0">There are extant likewise some letters from him to Cicero, and others to his friends, concerning his domestic affairs; in which, if there was occasion for secrecy, he wrote in cyphers; that is, he used the alphabet in such a manner, that not a single word could be made out. The way to decipher those epistles was to substitute the fourth for the first letter, as d for a, and so for the other letters respectively.</p>
  <footer class="blockquote-footer"><cite title="Source Title">(Suetonius & Thomson)</cite></footer>
</blockquote>

In terms of difficulty in breaking this code, the Caesar Cipher is very
insecure.  Simply possessing the knowledge of the decryption algorithm, as
simple as "to substitute the fourth for the first letter, as d for a, and so
for the other letters respectively" is sufficient to read any of Caesar's
historical correspondence.

In general, substitution ciphers are very susceptible to statistical analysis,
first described by al-Kind朝 around 800AD (Al-Kadit, 1992, p. 101).  His
approach was:

<blockquote class="blockquote">
  <p class="mb-0">One way to solve an encrypted message, if we know its [original] language, is to find a [different clear] text of the same language long enough to fill one sheet or so and then we count [the occurrences of] each letter of it.  We call the most frequently occurring letter the "first", the next most occurring the "second", the following most occurring the "third" and so on, until we finish all different letters in the cleartext [sample].  Then we look at the cryptogram we want to solve and we also classify its symbols.  We find the most occurring symbol and change it to the form of the "first" letter [of the cleartext sample], the next most common symbol is changed to the form of the "second" letter, and the following most common symbol is changed to the form of the "third" letter and so on, until we account for all symbols of the cryptogram we want to solve.</p>
  <p class="mb-0">It could happen sometimes that the cryptogram is too short to have all different letters.  The high and low [frequency] counts will not be correct, for high and low counts are only correct in long enough messages to correspond to all places of frequent and rare occurrences so that if some letters are [too] few in one segment of the message, they will be [too] many in others.  But if the cryptogram is too short, equivalence does not apply, letter ranks are not correct and [consequently] a second trick should be used to recover letters.  Such a trick is qualitative which is ... [here al-Kind朝' wrote in detail on possible letter combinations in a language like 'al' in Arabic... etc.]</p>
  <footer class="blockquote-footer"><cite>(Al-Kadit, 1992, pp. 107-108)</cite></footer>
</blockquote>

As a reference for the frequencies of English text, here's a histogram of
standard frequencies for each letter which I found online:

<div id="demo-histogram-english"></div>

The unmodified sample text I included in this post also has a frequency
distribution very visually similar to the distribution of English letters.
It's also really obvious that the frequencies for the ciphertext are merely
shifted horizontally from that of the plaintext.

<div id="demo-histogram-text"></div>

In terms of applying a statistical analysis technique to break a Caesar Cipher,
it's not necessary to use al-Kind朝's approach of going letter by letter if you
know that a `ROTN` technique is being used.  It's sufficient to compute the
frequency distribution for the ciphertext and then shift it over one step at a
time, comparing the similarity of the shifted histogram against English at each
step.  The offset which produces the closest similarity is the likeliest
candidate to decipher the ciphertext. Below is a table generated from each
possible offset from the ciphertext, where the value is its difference from
English according to the selected comparison method:

<div id="demo-statistics"></div>

[This post][link-similarity] has a description of a bunch of comparison
operations to use which have been implemented in the dropdown.  There's not a
lot of difference in the methods with the unmodified sample text - they all
accurately compute the right offset given a long enough message.  But because
the approach is focused on finding the right offset for all letters (contrasted
to al-Kind朝's approach of matching letter-by-letter) much smaller messages can
be broken.  In fact, many of the approaches including a standard Euclidean
distance measure will break a message as small as "Very short message" which
intuitively doesn't feel like it contains enough data to be able to decipher
using frequency analysis (but it does!).

<h2>References</h2>

* Al-Kadit, I. A. (1992). Origins Of Cryptology: The Arab Contributions. _Cryptologia,16_ (2), 97-126. doi:10.1080#8203;/0161-119291866801. Retrieved from <http://ljk.imag.fr/membres/Bernard.Ycart/mel/hm/AlKadi_cryptology.pdf>

* Suetonius. (n.d.). _The lives of the twelve Caesars: To which are added, his lives of the grammarians, rhetoricians, and poets_ (A. Thomson, Trans.). Retrieved from <http://www.gutenberg.org/files/6400/6400-h/6400-h.htm>
