[1]: http://gawker.com/valleywag/tech/google/opensocial-wont-open-till-next-year-331389.php
[2]: http://www.bwater.com/Uploads/FileManager/Principles/Bridgewater-Associates-Ray-Dalio-Principles.pdf
[3]: http://nymag.com/news/business/wallstreet/ray-dalio-2011-4/
[4]: https://sites.google.com/site/googdevreljobs/
[5]: {{link "bust.jpg"}}

...was August 25th, 2011.   On September 6th, 2011 (four years and two days
after I started my first Silicon Valley job at Google) I will be starting a
position as Developer Advocate at Twitter.

<!--BREAK-->

There’s a lot I can say about what made Twitter attractive, so much that I want
to save it for a future post.  The time since I made the definitive decision to
leave Google has been filled with a bunch of internal reflection, and I want to
get some of that up here so that I don’t need to repeat myself every time I
tell someone that I plan to leave and their first reaction is “oh, why would
you do that?”

Flat out, Google has been the best job of my life.  It’s very easy to imagine
that it may wind up being the best job of my entire career.  I’ve always felt
like I’ve been able to work on interesting and important things, trade ideas
with people I never would have even dreamed of meeting, and been richly
rewarded for my efforts.  I’ve been given the opportunity to see the Developer
Relations team grow from a handful of people working in adjacent cubes to an
organization which supports developers around the world and has over two
hundred members.

When I was originally hired for the team, I was supposed to be working on .NET
client library code and documentation, but the complexities of finishing up my
current contract and physically moving from New Jersey delayed my start date by
three months.  By the time I showed up for my first day, I was given the
assignment of ramping up on an internal secret project which nobody seemed to
be able to describe, but eventually became to be known as OpenSocial.

<p class="centered">
  {{template "image" (.Image "bust")}}
</p>

<!-- -**-END-**- -->

Back then, we did a lot of stuff ad-hoc.  I cold called a lot of developers.
The team never had a process for doing hackathons, so in my first month I
needed to figure out how to book large conference rooms, get catering budget,
and manage external guests.  We had to stall at the start of our first top
secret developer event, since the API was broken for most of the morning and we
couldn’t let the attendees use it.

But I also had a taste of being on the edge of something big and secret in the
Valley.  I was working with people who had founded companies like Excite.  I
got to be part of a handful of people who briefed Marc Andreessen about the
project.  I got my [first Valleywag refererence][1] and that meant that I was
starting to *be* someone, because any publicity was good publicity, right?  It
was a good time.

Two years of work on OpenSocial gave me a lot of experience.  At the time, the
project had evolved as a spec, but most of the attentions of the folks behind
it went into what would eventually be launched in the form of Buzz and then
Google+.  But at that point, after two years of the same project, I had found
an itch to try something different, and I had enough street cred to have some
flexibility moving around on the team.

Turned out that Google Chrome, a project I was initially not quite fond of but
was starting to grow on me, had plans to launch an Extensions API.  Since I had
done a bit of extension work for Firefox, I felt an urge to move onto the team.
It was new, and it was a little bit exciting.  Instead of being confined to the
limitations of Google Gadgets, Chrome Extensions could manipulate the entire
browser!

It was an excellent move.  Despite my initial misgivings, Chrome turned out to
be the best browser I've ever used.  The extensions team is fantastic, and they
had done a lot of things their own way which gave me some leeway to play
around.  Their docs server was custom written and the documentation was all
built out of the Chromium source tree.  To check in docs, I needed to get
commit access to the entire project, which they were happy to give, with the
warning “don’t break anything”.  To my credit (or not) I only broke the build
twice, due to some bad UNIX file permissions.  I wrote a custom samples gallery
which parsed all the code of the sample extensions and made a searchable index.
I was given access to the extensions gallery and able to scrape data.  I wrote
utilities, dashboards, servers, examples, articles, slide decks, client
libraries&mdash;anything I could to help make workflows of supporting the APIs
easier for myself and the team.

I got to travel a lot, too.  In the past few years I’ve been on business trips
to Seattle, Beijing, Shanghai, Seoul, London, Munich, Madrid, Brno, Tokyo,
Taipei, Hong Kong, Jakarta, Bangkok, Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and
Washington DC.  I’ve spoken to developers around the world, and was even
livestreamed at the last Google I/O so that my father and brother could watch
my talk from the comfort of their home in New Jersey.

At this point, I really believe that I'm starting to get a handle on this
Developer Relations stuff.  It's not your standard engineering job, and not
everyone is suited for the role.  When things are bad, you're answering the
same JavaScript question in a forum for the third time in a week, but when
things are good, you're in front of a 500 developers in Taiwan showing an HTML
orientation demo that you just got working that morning, to thunderous
applause.  In my experience, the benefits have far outweighed the drawbacks.

Which brings me back to the question of why I decided to leave such a rewarding
job.  I'd say that I like to stay on the edge of things and search out new
experiences.  New experiences help me evolve&mdash;the cumulative learnings of
every crazy thing I try affects any new project I tackle.  When the opportunity
to work at Twitter first landed in my lap, I rejected it.  But after a bit of
hounding on their part, and a bit of reflection on mine, I realized that I was
starting to miss that feeling of improvisation and excitement.  I realized that
I wasn't as hungry as I was a few years ago-I had gotten a bit more complacent,
and I wasn't evolving in the way I had two or four years prior.

I had always wondered what it was like to work in a pre-IPO company (more for
the experience, rather than equity) and I was embarrassed to realize that I was
considering abandoning that because my equity at Google hadn't fully vested, or
because I really wanted the holiday gifts, the bonuses, and access to Google's
amazing perks.

I started reading [Ray Dalio's Principles][2] (see [this explanation][3])
throughout this process, and **"It is a fundamental law of nature that to
evolve one has to push one’s limits, which is painful, in order to gain
strength—whether it’s in the form of lifting weights, facing problems head-on,
or in any other way"** really sums up my feelings at this point.  I want to try
more, and I'm willing to sacrifice my short term comfort to have a new
experience under my belt. Twitter is an attractive but painful move.  Which
makes me think that a change at this point was an effective way to push my
limits and see what kind of impact I can have next.

For those of you considering a Developer Relations job, I have nothing but good
things to say about Google's team.  And I'm sure that they have [at least one
more opening][4], now.

