Akira Kurosawa's THRONE OF BLOOD (as I like to think of it, [Michael
Fassbender's favorite
Macbeth](https://twitter.com/phillipstribune/status/602042773043314689)) is a
meticulous, engrossing, and beautiful work.  It was created at a time in 1957
where cinema still had a great deal of constraints, but also at a time where
Kurosawa had honed his square-frame black-and-white film technique to
perfection.  There are shots in Throne of Blood which I haven't seen done
with as much skill and artistry in any other film.

<!--BREAK-->

Kurosawa is one of my favorite technical directors - not only does he get
great performances and have compelling stories, but he focuses on movement of
the camera and composition of the scene.  He employs dollys and stages
elaborate tracking shots (which were apparently too nauseating and a turn-off
for Western audiences at first) and his framing is always beautiful and
painterly.  He'd directed 15 films before this one, all shot in the standard
non-widescreen 1.37:1 ratio so there's some excellent scene composition in
this film, but at least a few parts where I felt like he wanted to go wider
to give a grander scope to the scene.

<p class="centered">
  {{template "image" (.Image "aspect")}}
</p>

He made another 1.37:1 film in 1957 called The Lower Depths but then shot
almost exclusively widescreen for the rest of his career. The single
exception is Dodesukaden in 1970, which is a bit of an outlier because it was
also Kurosawa's first color movie. I find that important because Kurosawa
seemed to put off using color later than he might have.  Color was adopted
rapidly in film to differentiate against television, which was growing
quickly in US homes at the time.  12% of movies were color in 1947, but that
jumped to over 50% by 1954.  I'm not completely sure how that maps to Japan,
but the first Japanese color film was Carmen Comes Home in 1951, so I imagine
that Kurosawa as a popular director would've had the resources to make a
color movie earlier than 1970 if he wanted.

I love black and white movies because directors tend to focus on scene
composition.  For example, Film Noir has its characteristic heavy shadows
which add large swatches of black to a scene.  Throne of Blood has its share
of shadow, but also makes heavy use of a white, thick fog to lighten parts of
the picture.  Kurosawa said _"We decided that the main castle set had to be
built on the slope of Mount Fuji, not because I wanted to show this mountain
but because it has precisely the stunted landscape that I wanted. And it is
usually foggy. I had decided that I wanted lots of fog for this film."_  The
fog is used to such an incredible effect in the (spoiler for those of you who
haven't read Macbeth) last shot where the central Macbeth character Washizu
is shot down by his mutinous army.  The white creates a striking negative
space between the two factions as it envelops Washizu's corpse in a lazy,
slow curl.  I have no idea of how hard it was for Kurosawa to get this shot
or how many takes it took - the fog looks perfectly painted into place, and
I'd have to imagine a contemporary director saying "fuck it, we'll use a
digital effect" instead.

<p><video
  class="centered"
  preload="none"
  width="480"
  height="360"
  controls
  poster="{{(.Image "death").Data.Permalink}}"
  src="{{link "throne-of-blood-death-480.mp4" }}">
</video></p>

The ending features one of the most incredible stunt sequences I've ever
seen.  Washizu is struck down by dozens of arrows which were mostly actual
arrows shot into the scene by trained archers.  The look of absolute terror
on his face must have been at least partially real, as he waves his hands to
indicate he's about to move in a direction and for the archers not to shoot
there any more.  The effect is incredible, I can't think of any other movie
which communicates such tangible danger on screen.

<p><video
  class="centered"
  preload="none"
  width="480"
  height="360"
  controls
  poster="{{(.Image "arrows").Data.Permalink}}"
  src="{{link "throne-of-blood-arrows-480.mp4" }}">
</video></p>

Eight of Kurosawa's 15 prior films had also featured Toshir√¥ Mifune.  By this
point it seems that Kurosawa was more than happy to let Mifune dominate a
scene.  Throne of Blood in particular is very focused on Mifune's Washizu and
his increasingly manic behavior.  Mifune delivers an wonderful amount of
intensity and physicality in his performance, whether he's stomping around a
scene in full armor or silently staring down the camera while contemplating
his own guilty conscience.

<p class="centered">
  {{template "image" (.Image "mifune")}}
</p>

Overall, Mifune and Kurosawa went on to create 16 films (out of Kurosawa's
30) together, but had a falling out after Red Beard in 1965.  Mifune was
required to keep a beard for the 2 year production of that film and that kept
him from taking additional work.  Apparently that was a contributing factor
in their breakup, which seems pretty sad given the history of their
collaboration.  Red Beard was also the end of Kurosawa's black and white
films, so it seems that, whatever happened, he closed that chapter of his
life and started experimenting with new techniques.  But Throne of Blood,
seven films prior, has the wonderful quality of being a film by a legendary
director in a format he had mastered, starring a lead actor he loved to work
with.
