In May 2016, I was offered the chance to manage the Twitter Dashboard team.
This was my first opportunity to manage engineers and I was very conflicted
about switching over from a SWE to an EM.  As a software engineer, you are
generally only responsible for the trajectory of your own career. As an
engineering manager, you have a large potential impact on the careers and even
lives of all the people you manage.  Ultimately I decided to take the opportunity
but that I was obligated to do the work to improve my skills to be the best
manager I could be.

<!--BREAK-->

<blockquote align="center" class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">You never think the Peter principle is a thing until it happens to you. Which is to say that most of my team has an idiot for a manager now.</p>&mdash; Arne R-üîôüîõüîùüîú-K (@kurrik) <a href="https://twitter.com/kurrik/status/735520815148453889">May 25, 2016</a></blockquote>

Managing engineers is itself a skill, and one that is incredibly difficult to
cultivate unless you are already managing a team.  There's no shortage of
writing about ways to improve programming skills, but I found it
difficult to gather good advice on learning to manage teams.  So I'm
listing the resources which I found useful and hope to update this list as I
find more.  This isn't to say that I applied all of the advice given, but the
perspectives were important as I developed my own approach.

[rands]: http://randsinrepose.com/archives/category/management/
[rands-recruit]: http://randsinrepose.com/archives/how-to-recruit/
[rands-triggers]: http://randsinrepose.com/archives/triggers/
[rands-bored]: http://randsinrepose.com/archives/bored-people-quit/
[rands-snowflakes]: http://randsinrepose.com/archives/chaotic-beautiful-snowflakes/

 - [Rands in Repose][rands]. Michael Lopp writes beautiful, thoughtful advice on
managing engineers.  He dives into specific areas of management where good
managers excel and poor managers fall down. I've found [How to
Recruit][rands-recruit], [Triggers][rands-triggers], [Bored People
Quit][rands-bored], and [Chaotic Beautiful Snowflakes][rands-snowflakes]
especially notable, but the whole archive is worth browsing.

[pmarca]: http://pmarchive.com/guide_to_career_planning_part0.html
[pmarca-hiring]: http://pmarchive.com/how_to_hire_the_best_people.html

- [Pmarca Guide to Career Planning][pmarca].  Marc Andreessen took down his
  blog a while ago so some of these posts feel a little dated.  That being
said, I found the career planning series very valuable.  I certainly hadn't
planned my career with much fidelity and from what I can tell, few engineers
really do.  But coming up with a long-term plan and helping your reports
implement it (even if your team / company is only a small slice of that
plan) is extraordinarily rewarding.

[asana]: https://wavelength.asana.com/issue/people-management/
[asana-oneonone]: https://wavelength.asana.com/workstyle-what-is-a-1-1/
[asana-engaged]: https://wavelength.asana.com/workstyle-managers-can-keep-employees-engaged/

- [Managing and Leading Teams][asana].  Wavelength is a publication Asana puts
  out about strategies for work.  Their issue on managing teams has lots of
great articles.  I liked [Why 1-1 meetings are crucial to your team‚Äôs
success][asana-oneonone] and the advice on how to structure (and attend)
one-on-one meetings.  [What only managers can do to keep employees
engaged][asana-engaged] gives an opinionated framework around the
characteristics of Meaningfulness, Safety, and Availability of work.  The chart
at the end has a "what employees need" section which feels very authentic and a
great set of things to keep in mind when planning or reviewing work.

[wiseman]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HxLlgBATjpI

- [Liz Wiseman: Diminisher vs. Multiplier][wiseman].  This video was part of
  Twitter's new manager training class.  There's a larger framework (and
probably books, videos, and seminars to buy) but much of the gist is available
via YouTube.  I really like the contrast between the diminishing mindset of
"People won't figure it out without me" vs. the multiplying mindset of "People
are smart and will figure it out".
