[artcamp]: https://artcamp.com
[noah-bradley]: https://medium.com/@noahbradley/how-i-became-an-artist-4390c6b6656c#.ggfwpof21

I want to get better at creating art in 2017.  At the start of a new year I try
to make resolutions which are attainable by incremental effort over a longer
period of time, so when my friend Buster suggested creating a painting or
drawing every day in January, I eagerly agreed.

<!--BREAK-->

Noah Bradley, the founder of [Art Camp][artcamp], published [a great post about
his path to becoming an artist][noah-bradley].  I felt like Noah's early story
was close to my own, except he stuck with art whereas I had let it go over the
years. When my daughter Ada was born, I had some time during feeding and naps,
so I signed up for the course to see if I could get better.  Art Camp was
useful in giving me some tools to improve my own skills, but I didn't keep up
with the work and tapered off after the first lesson.

The 2017 resolution made me spend the time to paint after Ada went to sleep
every night in January. With about an hour's effort every day, I came out with
a portfolio of bad-to-rudimentary work that I'm proud of nonetheless.  It's
hard to practice finishing things, so it's extraordinarily satisfying to me to
say "I'm done working on this piece, time to move on" so regularly.

# Master studies

Art Camp emphasizes the importance of master studies from day one.  Initially
it seemed like rote copying, but I came to appreciate how much I could learn by
removing the need to think creatively and focus on learning the tools and ways
to achieve the effects the master painters were able to use in their own works.
In particular, choosing colors is very unintuitive for me and I think I came to
learn a lot about how masters would get a lot of mileage out of a few colors.

As I progressed through the early weeks of Art Camp, I would tend to try a
couple master studies before a work of my own to try and get a feel for
techniques and approaches I could use.  My original work never reached anywhere
near the quality of these paintings, so having something come out of this which
looks good has been rewarding.

I painted all of my work on a 9.7" iPad Pro using Procreate.  Most of these
were done in about an hour or so.  I tended to cut myself off if I was going
much longer.  For example, I only focused on the face of _Lady in Black with
Spanish Scarf_ because I had less time on Jan. 6.

Faces were what I wound up struggling with the most, actually.  I feel like I'm
able to make a face which looks like a face, but not the specific face I'm
going for.  Practice helped though, I feel like my Jan. 25 study of _Etude de
Jeune Fille_ came out the closest to the original work.

{{template "gallery" (.ImageList "2017-01-01" "2017-01-02" "2017-01-03" "2017-01-04" "2017-01-05" "2017-01-06" "2017-01-07" "2017-01-09" "2017-01-10" "2017-01-14" "2017-01-16" "2017-01-19" "2017-01-24" "2017-01-25")}}

# Imagination

Week 2 of Art Camp focused on sketching from the imagination.  I was surprised
by how difficult I found these, as I used to draw creatively for hours when I
was younger.  It's very very difficult to come up with something interesting
and focus on form and composition and technique all at the same time. But I
also realized that I've lost a lot of the freedom and creativity that I had as
a kid.

I'm probably the most embarrassed by these.  It's obvious that they're lacking
in a lot of depth, from lighting and color and general form.  One of my goals
in trying to improve my art is to do concept work for games I develop, so this
is an area I'd love to improve in (which will only happen after I do a lot more
of this terrible art first!)

{{template "gallery" (.ImageList "2017-01-08" "2017-01-11" "2017-01-12" "2017-01-13" "2017-01-15" "2017-01-23" "2017-01-26")}}

# Still life

I was really surprised by how much I liked still life!  I set up a desk lamp on
my kitchen table and arranged various things from my kitchen to paint every
night.  I think a lot of the experience from the master studies paid off.  It
was good to have practiced looking at the detail and shapes of an image in
front of me in order to recreate it on my canvas.

{{template "gallery" (.ImageList "2017-01-17" "2017-01-18" "2017-01-20" "2017-01-21" "2017-01-22")}}

# Self portrait

I made it to week 4 of Art Camp, which focused on self portraits.  I bought a
portable mirror and painted my own face for a few days.  I found this
surprisingly enjoyable as well and will probably try to continue doing these.
Noah made the point that it's the most reliable way to get a model and learn
how to paint faces and I totally felt like I got a lot of out these.  They're
not quite right - falling somewhere in the uncanny valley of actually looking
like me (Jan. 28 probably got the closest) but I think working a little longer
on polishing a self portrait might get to the point where the result feels more
alive.

{{template "gallery" (.ImageList "2017-01-27" "2017-01-28" "2017-01-29" "2017-01-30" "2017-01-31")}}

{{template "gallery-lightbox"}}

In closing, I'll say that it felt really good to push myself through all of
these pieces.  It wasn't easy, and I looked forward to February when I could
work on other things.  But I tried a lot of styles and subjects I hadn't
attempted before and I think I developed if even just a little bit.

My goals to develop further are to continue regular painting (at least weekly).
I want to focus on feeling more relaxed so that it feels more calming than
stressful to sit down and do a painting.  I think part of that is getting past
the embarrassment of sharing my work (even the mediocre stuff) and accumulating
enough experience that it comes easier for me.  I'd love to start to develop my
own unique style and start using it to do work for games.  Finally, I really
want to tap into my creativity more.  I can't believe it was so difficult to do
work from imagination, almost certainly due to lack of practice!
